---
print_background: true
export_on_save:
    html: true
puppeteer:
    format: "Letter"
    timeout: 3000
    scale: 0.8
---

# Homework 10

## 1. Consider $\R^4$. Let $\mathbf{u} = \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 2 \\ 3 \\ 4\end{bmatrix}$ and $\mathbf{v} = \begin{bmatrix} 5 \\ 6 \\ 7 \\ 8\end{bmatrix}$. Find the basis for the orthogonal complement of $W = \operatorname{span}\set{\mathbf{u}, \mathbf{v}}$.

Let $
A = \begin{bmatrix}
    | & | \\
    \mathbf{u} & \mathbf{v} \\
    | & |
\end{bmatrix}$. Then, $W^\perp = \ker A^\top = \ker\begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\
    5 & 6 & 7 & 8
\end{bmatrix}$.

$$
\operatorname{rref}\begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\
    5 & 6 & 7 & 8
\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 0 & -1 & -2 \\
    0 & 1 & 2 & 3
\end{bmatrix} \\[1em]
\therefore y = -2z-3w \\
x = z + 2w \\
z,w\in\R
$$

As such,

$$
W^\perp = \Set{
    \begin{bmatrix}
        z + 2w \\
        -2z-3w \\
        z \\
        w
    \end{bmatrix}
    : z,w \in\R
} = \operatorname{span}\Set{
    \begin{bmatrix}
        1 \\ -2 \\ 1 \\ 0
    \end{bmatrix},
    \begin{bmatrix}
        2 \\ -3 \\ 0 \\ 1
    \end{bmatrix}
}.
$$




## 2. Find the orthogonal projection of the vector $(1, 1, 1)$ onto the subspace defined by the equations $$\begin{cases}x + y + z = 0, \\x − y − 2z = 0, \\\end{cases}$$

## 3. Find the orthogonal basis of $\R^3$ with $\begin{bmatrix}    1  \\  1 \\ 0\end{bmatrix}$ as one of the vectors. Hint: You can use Gram-Schmidt process on a basis with  $\begin{bmatrix}    1  \\  1 \\ 0\end{bmatrix}$ as the first vector. e.g. $$\Set{    \begin{bmatrix}        1 \\ 1 \\ 0    \end{bmatrix},    \begin{bmatrix}        0 \\ 1 \\ 0    \end{bmatrix},    \begin{bmatrix}        0 \\ 0 \\ 1    \end{bmatrix}}.$$

## 4.

### (a) Find an orthonormal basis for the kernel of the following matrix. $$A = \begin{bmatrix}2 & 1 & 0 & −1 \\3 & 2 & −1 & −1\end{bmatrix}.$$

### (b) Find an orthonormal basis for $(\ker(A))^\perp$, the orthogonal complement of $\ker(A)$.

### (c\) Does the orthonormal basis in (i) combined with the orthonormal basis in (ii)for an orthonormal basis for $\R^4$? Explain.

## 5. Consider the following subspace of $\R^4$ $$V = \operatorname{span}\Set{    \begin{bmatrix}        1 \\ 1 \\ 1 \\ 1    \end{bmatrix},    \begin{bmatrix}        1 \\ 0 \\ 0 \\ 1    \end{bmatrix},    \begin{bmatrix}        0 \\ 2 \\ 1 \\ -1    \end{bmatrix}}$$

### (i) What is the dimension of $V$?

### (ii) Using Gram-Schmidt Process, find an orthogonal basis for $V$.

### (iii) Find the orthogonal projection of $\begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 2 \\ 3 \\ 4\end{bmatrix}$ to $V$.

## 6.

### (i) Find the least square solution of the following system $$\begin{bmatrix}2 & 3 \\4 & −2 \\1 & 5 \\2 & 0\end{bmatrix}\mathbf{x} =\begin{bmatrix}2 \\−1 \\1 \\3\end{bmatrix}$$

### (ii) Find the orthogonal projection of $b$ onto the image of $A$ using the least square solution.

## 7. Find the least square fitting straight line $y = C + Dt$ given the following set of data. $$\begin{array}{|c|c|c|c|c|}\hline t_i & -2 & 0 & 1 & 3 \\\hline y_i & 0 & 1 & 2 & 5\\\hline\end{array}$$

## 7. Consider the non-standard inner product on $\R^2$. $$\langle\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v}\rangle = \begin{bmatrix}    u_1 & u_2 \end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}    1 & 2 \\ 2 & 5\end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix}    v_1 \\ v_2\end{bmatrix}$$

$$
\langle\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v}\rangle = \begin{bmatrix}
    u_1 & u_2
\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 2 \\ 2 & 5
\end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix}
    v_1 \\ v_2
\end{bmatrix}
$$

### (a) Verify this is an inner product of $\R^2$.

### (b) Using Gram-Schmidt process, starting with the vectors $\begin{bmatrix}    1 \\ 0\end{bmatrix}$ and $\begin{bmatrix}    0 \\ 1\end{bmatrix}$, find an orthogonal basis under this inner product.

## 8. Consider the space of all continuous functions on $[0, 1]$, $C[0, 1]$ with the standard inner product. $$\langle f, g\rangle = \int_0^1 f(x)g(x)\d x$$

### (a) Use Gram-Schmidt process. Find an orthogonal basis using $\operatorname{span}\Set{x^2, x, 1}$.

### (b) We prove previously that for any $m\neq n$, $\sin 2\pi mx$ and $\sin2\pi nx$ are always mutually orthogonal. Write down the formula of the orthogonal projection of $x^2$ onto the subspace $$\operatorname{span}\set{1,\sin(2\pi x),\sin(2\pi2x)}.$$ Compute it. You need to do integration by part to find the coefficient, but you can use an online integration calculator to find it.
